Add post about cross-project testing with tmt and packit (#651)
cockpit-project/cockpit-project.github.io: _posts/2023-08-01-tmt-cross-project-testing.md

Unfortunately it is technically hard to actually do reverse dependency testing in general in Fedora [†](#footnotes). But also, it is too late at the distro level anyway: At that point the new upstream release which includes the regresssion was already done, and the culprit landed possibly weeks ago already, so that it disappeared from every developer's minds already.

It's [far more efficient](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Shift-left_testing) to flag regressions in a project's consumers right in the pull request that introduces them, *before* it lands: That is the cheapest and most effective time to know what change caused this, the context is in the developer's head, and it avoids the weeks-long cycle of finding the regression, bugzilla, and finding some time to actually fix it. 10 of our known issues have been open since [2021 or earlier](https://github.com/cockpit-project/bots/issues?q=is%3Aissue+is%3Aopen+label%3Aknownissue+created%3A%3C2022-01-01)! [‡](#footnotes)

## Packit and tmt to the rescue

It turns out that modern [Packit](https://packit.dev/) and [tmt](https://tmt.readthedocs.io/) know enough tricks to actually do this. The high-level strategy is:

>  1. Configure Packit to build every commit of your main branch, i.e. every merged PR, into a [COPR](https://copr.fedorainfracloud.org/) repository. That is not just useful for CI, but also for human users: They can easily test the latest fixes or features before you officially release them.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 1. Configure Packit to build every commit of your main branch, i.e. every merged PR, into a dedicated [COPR](https://copr.fedorainfracloud.org/) repository. That is not just useful for CI, but also for human users: They can easily test the latest fixes or features before you officially release them.
```

Author: Applied, thanks!

 2. Identify some strategic dependencies of your project which potentially or actually break your tests often.

>  3. For each of these, add a tmt test plan for your project, and configure Packit to run it for each PR. These run as a separate status, so it makes it very clear if/when a proposed change in the dependency breaks your project.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 3. For each of these, add a tmt test plan for your project, and configure a separate Packit test job to run it for each PR. You will configure it to run with a dedicated status name, so it makes it very clear if/when a proposed change in the dependency breaks your project.
```

Author: This feels like too much technical detail for this high-level strategy. I pointed this out in the "plug it all together" part of the "Enable your test in a dependency project" section instead.

Reviewer: agreed, thanks!

The canonical way to set this up is with a COPR. Go to <https://copr.fedorainfracloud.org> and create a "New Project" in your organization or user. Fill in the "1. Project information" section and mark your desired distro releases in "2. Build options". At the bottom, also fill in the "Packit allowed forge projects", i.e. allow the Packit service to interact with your project's pull requests. Example:

![packit allowed forge projects](/images/packit-allowed-forge-projects.png)

Take a look at [Cockpit's "main-builds" COPR](https://copr.fedorainfracloud.org/coprs/g/cockpit/main-builds/) for an example.

Then configure `packit.yaml` in your project to do a [build for each commit](https://packit.dev/docs/configuration/upstream/copr_build#supported-triggers) that lands on your "main" branch; that may have a different name for your project of course. For example, [cockpit-podman did this](https://github.com/cockpit-project/cockpit-podman/pull/1365):

```yaml
- job: copr_build
  trigger: commit
  branch: "^main$"
  owner: "@cockpit"
  project: "main-builds"
  preserve_project: True
```

> After landing that, check your COPR's "Builds" page that you actually get a successful package build. The first run will fail, you will get a notification email and have to approve the "packit" COPR user to trigger builds in your COPR.

Reviewer: maybe you could mention that to avoid this, it should be possible to edit the permissions via copr CLI directly before (and here is also a link in our docs for the whole "custom Copr repo" setup https://packit.dev/docs/configuration/upstream/copr_build#using-a-custom-copr-project):

`$ copr-cli edit-permissions --builder packit [--admin packit] <project>`

Author: Thanks! I added a sentence which links to that piece of packit docs, that's very useful for automation.

tests you want to run from your project. Unfortunately you cannot yet [auto-import all plans](https://github.com/teemtee/tmt/issues/1770), but first of all the plan structure doesn't tend to change often, and second this may actually be useful to select a subset of tests that apply to the tested dependency.

So this is mostly a copy of your project's main test plan, with one modification: they should not run by default, but only in a "revdeps" tmt context. For triggering cockpit-podman's tests, this can look like this:
```yaml
# reverse dependency test
enabled: false

adjust+:
  when: revdeps == yes
  enabled: true

discover:
    how: fmf
    url: https://github.com/cockpit-project/cockpit-podman
    ref: "main"
execute:
    how: tmt

/podman-system:
    summary: Run cockpit-podman system tests
    discover+:
        test: /test/browser/system

# ... possibly more test plans here
```

Conversely, you should mark the main test plan for the dependency project to *not* run in the "revdeps" scenario, to keep them apart in the PR statuses and log views:

```yaml
adjust+:
  when: revdeps == yes
  enabled: false
```

> Finally, plug it all together: Tell `packit.yaml` to run the "revdeps" context test plan on current Fedora against your "builds from main" COPR, by specifying [tf_extra_params](https://packit.dev/docs/configuration/upstream/tests#optional-parameters). You can of course choose more/different `target`s, as long as your COPR has matching builds for them:

Reviewer: does it make sense to mention the usage of `identifier` that is then reflected in the status name or is that too much details?

Author: Yes, it does, see above. I updated this paragraph.

          - type: repository-file
            id: https://copr.fedorainfracloud.org/coprs/g/cockpit/main-builds/repo/fedora-$releasever/group_cockpit-main-builds-fedora-$releasever.repo
          tmt:
            context:
              revdeps: "yes"
```

This will result in a new packit test status where you can see the result and logs:

![packit revdeps test status](/images/packit-revdeps-test-status.png)

For an example, see this [cockpit PR](https://github.com/cockpit-project/cockpit/pull/19155) which enables this. This approach was developed and tested extensively [in an experimental PR](https://github.com/cockpit-project/cockpit/pull/19117).

## Conclusion

This demonstrates that it is possible today to do upstream cross-project testing for reverse dependency gating, without any extra privileges, secrets, or self-managed infrastructure. I truly believe that this approach on a bigger scale will lead to fewer regressions, less frustration, and avoid long and annoying bugzilla/fix/release turnaround cycles. It can increase velocity across the FOSS landscape in the same way as pervasive reverse dependency testing increased stability and velocity in Debian and Ubuntu.

> Many thanks to [Karel Srot](https://github.com/kkaarreell) from tmt, [Laura Barcziová](https://github.com/lbarcziova) and [Frantisek Lachman](https://github.com/lachmanfrantisek) from Packit, and [Miroslav Vadkerti](https://github.com/thrix) from Testing Farm for their great help with figuring out all the details here!

Reviewer 2: Hi Martin, this is very nice post. Great job! I also like the chosen approach where there are dedicated revdep tests and agreed terms of cooperations (as you are mentioning), instead of running everything available. Just a nitpick, I am not from `tmt` project. Even though I have contributed with few patches I definitely do not consider myself as project representative, I am more a happy user. If you will, you can mention [keylime](https://github.com/keylime/keylime) project where we are also using some of the approaches you are describing.

Author: Hah, thanks for spotting. Updated to "who knows a lot about tmt" :grin:
